# Optimize with index in RDBMS

## Situation

Create a table `parent` with the following columns 'pid' (Primary key)

```sql
CREATE TABLE parent (
    pid INT PRIMARY KEY,
);
```

Sample data: 1, 2, 3

```
INSERT INTO products (pid) VALUES (1);
INSERT INTO products (pid) VALUES (2);
INSERT INTO products (pid) VALUES (3);
```

Create a table `child` with the following columns 'cid' (Primary key), 'pid' (Foreign key)

```sql
CREATE TABLE child (
    cid INT PRIMARY KEY,
    pid INT,
    FOREIGN KEY (pid) REFERENCES parent(pid)
);
```

Sample data: (1, 3)
```sql
INSERT INTO child (cid, pid) VALUES (1, 3);
```

Okay now let's try these queries:

Insert to parent table without commit
```sql
INSERT INTO child (cid, pid) VALUES (2, 1);
```

```sql
DELETE FROM parent WHERE pid = 2;
```

We will be blocked by the foreign key constraint when running DELETE query although there is no child record referencing the parent record for pid = 2. This is because the transaction that inserts the child record with pid = 2 has not been committed yet. Why do we have to wait for the transaction insert commit to delete the parent record? Because the foreign key constraint is checked at the end of the transaction. This is the default behavior of most RDBMS. This is the reason why we cannot delete the parent record without commit.

## Solution

### Use index

Beside using index to optimize query, we can also use index to optimize foreign key constraint checking. We can create an index on the foreign key column to speed up the foreign key constraint checking.

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_pid ON child(pid);
```

- Question: Why using index solve above problem?
- Answer: When we create an index on the foreign key column. When we run the DELETE query, the RDBMS will use the index to check if there is any child record referencing the parent record. If there is no child record referencing the parent record, the RDBMS will not block the DELETE query. This is because the RDBMS can use the index to quickly check if there is any child record referencing the parent record. If there is no child record referencing the parent record, the RDBMS will not block the DELETE query. This is how using index can optimize foreign key constraint checking.

So what does index do behind the scene? When we create an index on a column, the RDBMS will create a data structure called B-tree. The B-tree is a balanced tree data structure that is used to store the index. The B-tree is a data structure that is optimized for searching. When we create an index on a column, the RDBMS will create a B-tree data structure to store the index. When we run a query that uses the index, the RDBMS will use the B-tree to quickly find the rows that satisfy the query. When we run a query that uses the index, the RDBMS will use the B-tree to quickly find the rows that satisfy the query. This is how using index can optimize query. This is also how using index can optimize foreign key constraint checking.
